# 2024/07/18

---
# News

After quite a busy December, I'm happy to announce that a few updates on ApexLibra.org just dropped :)

## [Database Service 2.0](/apex/database-service)
Quite a significant update to Database Service. The biggest novelty is **[Unit of Work](/apex/database-service/unit-of-work)** implementation, which extends the
DatabaseService class. Apart from
typical
features of Unit of Work (handling DMLs bulkification and tracking relationships between records), it has all capabilities of the DB service. It tracks issued
database operations in unit tests, provides mocking capabilities, supports all operations DB services do – all CRUD operations, lead converts, and merges can
be registered at any time and executed later when the `commitWork()` method is called.

DatabaseService internals have been redesigned, with a few changes to the interface.


### Execution Mode is now set with the following methods:
- `asUser()`: Enforces the object permissions, field-level security, and sharing rules of the current user. Always runs in "with sharing" context.
- `asUserWithPermissionSetId()`: This is still in Developer Preview, awaiting GA.
- `asSystem()`: Default. Ignores object and field-level permissions, inherits sharing rules from the calling class.
- `asSystemWithSharing()`: Ignores object and field-level permissions but enforces record sharing rules.
- `asSystemWithoutSharing()`: Ignores both object and field-level permissions and record sharing rules.

### New methods supported:
- countQuery
- mergeRecords
- convertLead

### DML Results
The framework now wraps Database.\*Result (Database.SaveResult, DeleteResult, etc.) into custom DML.Result and DML.Error classes. This is done because the
standard
classes, the absolute pinnacle of Salesforce engineering, are a total pain to deal with. None of the standard classes share any common interface, even though
they are basically identical. Due to that, they can't be easily handled in any methods. They can't be constructed in unit tests, can't be passed to Aura, cause
internal errors in serialization and in Batch classes, etc.

Results are now repacked to DML.Result class, which are @AuraEnabled and do not have any of the standard classes' issues.

### Unit Testing Enhancements
Previously, the framework would work either in MOCK mode or real DML statements mode. This has been revised to provide a hybrid approach:
- As previously, all DMLs can be mocked by calling the "mockDmls()" method, for "pure apex" testing. In this mode, database operations are mocked and never hit
  the database. This is convenient for packaging and also executes a whole lot faster than traditional tests, but does not test integration between automations.
- Developers can also do standard database DMLs, but mock one of the rows as a failure. This is helpful for testing such scenarios in business logic, without
  wasting time on thinking "how to make that one record fail."
- Query and DML mocking capabilities have been enhanced with new methods.

### Operation Tracking
In Test runs, all operations are now tracked, so developers can check and make assertions on which database operations were executed, what were the inputs and
results of each operation.


## [Query Framework 2.3](/apex/query)
Query Framework is updated to provide the same Execution Mode interface as the DatabaseService framework (asUser, asSystem, etc.).

Also, introduced 3 new methods for setting SOQL's FOR clause:
- forView
- forReference
- forUpdate

## [Callout Framework 1.1](/apex/callout)
Thanks to Justin Willis contributions, Callout now has additional handlers:
- onRateLimit - Executes when webservice returned 429 Rate Limit
- sleep() – Waits for specified number of milliseconds, before the next action (ex. retrying callout)
- Bumped API Version to 62.0